


	
	
	
	



It was a good morning
and the little wheels were excited. They had been waiting and waiting
for their first run, and today was the day! 


Last night,
they had been brought home from the shop for Shazia. They were bright
red, and each had two little ghungroos at the centre. Shazia's sister had put them there last night.
Shazia loved the sound of ghunghroos even though she hated dancing — or at least dancing the way the teacher told her to.  



	
	
	
	


The new bicycle was her big
surprise as she was turning six today. 
It had two little trainer
wheels. And the little wheels could not wait to be on the road. 
They
hadn’t even seen a road yet!  



	
	
	
	


But they had heard plenty
about it. The older bikes in the shop had gone on and on about the traffic, the dust, the noise, the gravel, the
pain, the honking, the pits, and how hard and tiring and grown up it
was to be on the road.


The tiny wheelies weren’t
put off by any of this. For them, the road was full of adventure –
Shazia would race in and out of the lanes, and they would roll and
roll, and make merry tinkling sounds with each roll, and never let
her fall.
 





	
	
	
	


So while they waited and
giggled, they also sang,


"
We
are the wheelies, 
the wheely-wheely wheelies 


The only-wonly wheelies, 
of
the whole wide world."
They had been hushed and they
had been shushed, but they did not stop. So it was no surprise that
after the fifty-ninth time, everyone around them, including the
bigger wheels of the bike, turned to them and said in one voice,
"Enough!"
 





	
	
	
	


"Meeep,"
they said in surprise and looked about.  
"All of
us have wheels working somewhere," the fan in the room said, "so
do stop with this only-wonly nonsense."
 





	
	
	
	



"And with that
awful tune!" said the bell, who was feeling a bit unhappy about not
being the only sound-making thing on the cycle. 



"You
don’t have wheels," the little ones said to the fan, "and
neither do you," to the bell. 


"That is
what you think!" said the fan. "My motor has wheels and my blades move because of electricity which is produced with the help of
wheels, BIG-BIG wheels, and lots of them."
 





	
	
	
	



"And I go
tring tring
 because of little wheels inside me that produce the
sound," said the bell.
 





	
	
	
	


"We were
made with machines that cannot work without wheels," 
said the
tubelight from the wall.
 










	
	
	
	


"And I
would not be there to eat if the wheels of the millstone did not grind
the wheat," said the rotis from the dabba on the table.





	
	
	
	





"Hey, who would get watered without the water wheels then?" asked the lime pickle. 
"None of us!" the mango  chutney replied. 
     





	
	
	
	



And the big wheels of the
cycle said, "This cycle only would not have been made."





	
	
	
	



"And I
would just be a fancy needle without wheels,"
the sewing machine said from its corner.
  





	
	
	
	



The little wheels went quiet. A few minutes later, they started another song. 


"We are
the wheelies, the wheely-wheely wheelies 


The wonder-ful wheelies, that
run the whole wide world." 


Slowly, everyone joined in the singing. 





	
	
	
	



Little sleepy Shazia thought
she heard some singing. She jumped out of bed and woke everyone else up too. It
was her birthday after all, so she got to do what she wanted. 


And soon the little wheelies,
the big wheels, the whole cycle, Shazia on the cycle and her sister
running behind her, all came out to the lane and started running on
the gravel. 



The wheels were going on to the road!  



	
	
	
	


Wheels
are everywhere!
When
you look around, you’ll see that wheels are all around us. Make a
list of things in which wheels are used – at home, in your school,
on the streets. Above are a few just to get you started. Ask your
parents and teachers to add to your list.
  


