
          











Every winter break, Abel posts a card
to his Ammachi. And it usually reaches
her on New Year’s Day.


      

          

          











Today, Amma asks Abel to write the address on the card himself. He has learnt to write numbers and the alphabet at school.












Abel writes the address nervously.


Amma sticks a stamp on the envelope.
Abel runs to the post box and drops it in.


      

      

          











It’s Christmas Eve.

Amma is cooking payasam,
Abel’s favourite sweet dish.


      











But Abel is stomping his feet angrily.
“Abel! What happened?” asks Amma.
“The postmaster won’t understand my
handwriting. Ammachi will never get
my card,” he wails.













So Amma takes Abel to meet Postmaster Wilson.


“Wilson Uncle!” Abel cries, “What if Ammachi

doesn’t get my card, because of my handwriting?”












“Don’t worry,” Postmaster Wilson says.
“All the letters are sorted by our robot RIA.”


          











RIA reads the address,
identifies the postal code
and sorts each postal code
into the correct pile.


      











But Abel is still worried.
“Uncle, please see if RIA has
sorted my card correctly.”


          












Postmaster Wilson looks for the letter and finds it in the right box.


      











Amma looks at the card. Abel’s 7 looks like a 1.


“Then how did it land in the right box?” Abel is surprised.












“RIA sorted your card correctly
because it learned by looking at
the handwriting of millions
of people,” says Postmaster Wilson.
“That is why it could understand
your 7 even though it looked like a 1.”


“RIA is so smart!” says Abel.












“It’s because RIA keeps learning from numerous examples every day.
This is called Machine Learning,” the Postmaster says. 


          











“So will Ammachi get her card?”


“Don’t worry, Abel.
She will get her card by

New Year’s Eve,” 
Postmaster Wilson replies.


      

          











Postmaster Wilson is right!

Ammachi gets the card on New Year’s Day. 

When she calls Abel, he tells her all about their adventures with the amazing robot
at the post office.


      











What is Machine Learning? 


When we are born, there are very few things we know how to do. As we grow up, we learn

new things.
Like us, computers can learn through experience, and learn to do a task

without being told how to do it.


For example, if we want a computer to tell the difference between a cow and a cat, it needs

to be shown thousands of pictures of cats and cows. The computer will study the pictures

and soon work out for itself that cats are small and cows are large, or that cats have

shorter noses than cows. The more pictures of cows and cats a computer studies,

the fewer mistakes it makes telling them apart.


          
 
This book is a work of fiction. Though the technology depicted in the book exists, 
the characters, situations, and events are entirely made up.


      
