
          


Rivers are like time machines.
If people jump into one and travel back far enough,
they will be able to witness history come alive.



      
No two rivers are alike. Their moods change depending on what time of year it is and which part of the country they’re travelling through.

          
Some rivers are peaceful in the winter.

      
Some rivers are small and shy in the summer.
Some rivers roar
angrily in the monsoons.

          
A river may be brown, grey, black, blue, green
or several other shades. They change their colour
based on what’s inside them or what’s around them.

      
Sometimes they are the colour of the rocks at the bottom
of the river. Sometimes they match the colour of the sky.
Rivers also change their course. If a river is in one spot
in the past, it may be somewhere else in the future.

          
Many rivers like the Ganga are thousands of years old. 
They have seen humankind grow up.
People have always loved living 
and working near rivers. 
Rivers know how to take care of people.

      
Some of our food comes from rivers and river water is used to grow most food. When the food
has made its way through the body, rivers
to the rescue again!
 

          
If rivers could speak,
they might demand people dump
their poop somewhere else.

      

          
Humans aren’t the only creatures rivers look after.
Many birds and plants, animals and fishes, insects
and flowers rely on rivers.

      

          
Rivers even support musical talent.
Insects sing strange and wonderful songs underwater
which sound like they’re from another world.

      

          

          
India gets its name from a river. 
Apart from naming the country, the Indus was home to one of the oldest civilisations in the world. The river helped the ancient people build cities. 

      

      

          
They used the river to travel to lands both near and far, carrying everything they wanted to buy and sell.
 

      

          
The Indus Valley citizens lived beside the river
quite happily. Until suddenly they didn’t.
More than 3,000 years ago, the civilisation vanished.
Some people think they got a bit too greedy. That by overusing the forest and water, they made the river flood.
Floods are scary but sometimes they are useful.
When floodwaters return to the river, they leave behind rich soil on the banks—perfect for growing crops!

      

          
But floods can also destroy lives and buildings.
Furious rivers frighten people. Ancient humans thought
songs, prayers and gifts could calm the river down.
It wasn’t usually the best plan.

      

          
Travel on the river time machine back to the present. Some things from the past will seem familiar.
Rivers continue to be used for food and transport.
People have also built canals to connect rivers,
carry water to those who don’t live near rivers,
and to make it easy to travel on them.

      

          
People construct dams to control the flow
of rivers, store water, and create electricity 
from the river’s energy.

      

          
But all this human meddling is 
messing up the rivers. Dams and canals
make it harder for rivers to take care
of all their creatures.
 

      

          
Many people don’t understand how rivers work, how rivers live and how rivers die. 
In some areas, rivers have become as dry as deserts. In others, rivers are treated like rubbish bins, sewage pipes, and plastic dumps.
 

      

          
If the river time machine takes 
people on a trip into the future, 
what will they see?

      

          
A scene of empty rivers which live only
in old stories. They will find states and 
countries at war over the few rivers which 
do exist. 
They will wander into a barren wasteland.

      

          
Or they will see a world in which humans have learned to live with nature and with each other. 
A world where fresh water is stored, waste water is recycled, and both are used responsibly.
They will find clean rivers and people
who protect them.

      

          
The second future isn’t impossible.
Our skills and technology have brought
dead rivers back to life before.
Rivers have taken care of us for thousands
of years. Now some humans are trying to
take care of our rivers.

      
Some courts have decided that rivers
have the same legal rights humans do.

          


If someone damages a river, it’ll be like harming another person. Imagine the long list of complaints 
a river will have against people!



      
GUILTY!

          
Children are taking to the streets
to demand a better future.
In 2015, 11-year-old Stella Bowles campaigned her local government to fix the polluted river—and they did! Adults are beginning to listen.

      
This river
is contaminated
with fecal bacteria!
All across the globe, children are telling adults
that they need to do a better job of looking after the world they’re leaving behind. It’s the only one we have, after all.
  
AMAZON
sea levels
rising!
Climate
Strike

          
The work of cleaning rivers never ends. 
There will be more humans, more farms, 
more factories.
Luckily, there is enough water 
for everyone. 
We just need to look after it and after each other.

      
