










Viveka wants to paint the sunflower field

near her house. She looks at the sunflowers

carefully one afternoon.












“I wonder why they are called

sunflowers,” she says to Montu

and Bontu. “Maybe it is because

they look like the sun?”












In the evening, Viveka takes

Montu and Bontu outside to eat.












She watches the

sunflowers in the distance

swaying in the breeze.


“Look!” she says to Billi, the cat,

“The sunflowers look like they’re

going to fall asleep, just like you!”












Finally, Viveka sits down to paint.


First she paints the sun high in the sky,

just like it was in the afternoon.


          











Then she paints the sunflowers

with their heads looking down sleepily,

like she saw them in the evening.


      











In the morning, Viveka goes to the sunflower field

to check if her painting is correct.


“Oh no,” she says, “I’ve painted them all wrong!

I will have to do it again today.”
“The sunflowers look like they are waking up,

but the flowers in my painting look like

they are 
falling asleep.”












“This time, I will get it right!”

Viveka tells Montu and Bontu.


She goes out to the field

at noon and makes a drawing

of how the flowers look.












The next morning, Viveka runs to the field

to check her new painting.


“How can this be?” she cries.

“Are these sunflowers full of mischief?

Or is this magic?”












Curious, Viveka climbs the tallest tree in her garden.


“I’m going to watch their every move!”


          











Over the next few days,

Viveka observes the

sunflowers carefully.


      











She paints them every day for a week.

Then, on Sunday, she looks at all her paintings together. 












Suddenly, she understands what the sunflowers have been doing.

“It isn’t magic or a trick,” she says, smiling. “The sunflowers just love to follow the sun!”

Why Do Sunflowers Follow the Sun?
The Earth revolves around the Sun
while also rotating on its axis.
 As it rotates, half of the planet faces the Sun, and we call this “daytime”.
 At the same time, the other half is in the dark, and we call this “night”.
We see the Sun rising in the east in the morning and setting in the west in the evening. Throughout the day, plants use the Sun’s light to prepare their food. But not all plants follow the Sun. The stems of young sunflowers contain cells that make them turn towards
 the Sun’s light. This property is called heliotropism. This is why sunflowers follow the Sun’s journey across the sky.  
