Where did I put that petri dish? 
Oh, hello! Have you seen a small glass dish with a lid? 
It’s for an important experiment I’m doing. 
I’ve put about a billion cells inside it.

          
I know what you’re thinking: How can 
you fit one billion of anything inside 
a small dish?

      
My name is Dr. Ira and I’m a microbiologist.

          
I’m not the kind of doctor you see when 
you have a fever or an earache. 
I’m a doctor that studies invisible things. 
I know that sounds ridiculous but let 
me explain.

      
What if I told you that all 
around us 
in the air, soil, water,
and even inside us—in our 
stomachs, noses and ears—
are thousands, no, millions, no... 
TRILLIONS of tiny living creatures 
called microbes? 
Ewww! YUCK! Cheee?
There are around one trillion kinds of microbes on our planet. 
While each of these microbes looks different and lives in a 
different habitat, most microbes can broadly be divided into

          
Bacteria

      

          
Viruses

      

          
Fungi

      

          
Algae

      

          
Protozoa

      

          
As a microbiologist, I spend 
my time studying bacteria. 
Would you like to see where 
I work? 

      
 
Welcome to my lab! 

Yuck! What’s that smell?


Ugh! This orange has been sitting on my friend Tashi’s desk for a week now. 
See how it’s covered in green fuzz? That’s fungus. 
Shall we take a closer look? 
Let’s use a microscope. It helps us see things that our eyes aren’t 
powerful enough to see on their own. 

 
I know they look scary but some 
microbes can be very helpful. 

For instance, this fungus tells us 
that the orange is spoiled and 
that we shouldn’t eat it. 

Did you know that 
there are microbes 
that can eat plastic? 
They could help solve 
plastic pollution! 


          

          











Not all microbes are friendly though. 


Some types of the bacteria E.coli can cause tummy aches. 
But if we get to know 
them better and understand why they make us sick, 
we can try to prevent illnesses. 
That’s why I study how E.coli cells react to 
changes in their environment. I use some
very cool tools to do this.


      

      

          











Microscope: an instrument which makes really small objects look bigger by magnifying them. 


      

          











Petri Dish: a circular, transparent dish with a flat lid used to maintain microbes in certain conditions. 


      











Pipette: a slender tube with a bulb at one end used for transferring or measuring small quantities of liquid.




          
Autoclave: a strong heated container that uses high pressure and temperature for chemical reactions and other processes.

      











Let’s ask Tashi if he’s seen my petri dish. And tell him to throw away that orange! 


Hi Tashi!

          











Tashi was my first friend at university. 
When I first came here to study, I felt lost. I didn’t 
speak much English and all my classes were hard. 
Plus, everyone else seemed so smart and I just 
couldn’t keep up. 


I wanted to give up so many times and just go home, 
but how could I?


      

          











I'm the first woman in my family to go to college 
and they supported me every step of the way. 
I didn’t want to let them or myself down. Besides, I loved 
exploring this invisible world around me. So I kept trying.


Learning to not give up 
is important, especially 
when you’re 
a microbiologist.

      











Because a lot of the 
experiments I do fail. 
What keeps me going is 
when things work. It’s so 
exciting when you’ve 
learned something that 
no one else knows yet! 

But even when things 
don’t work out, it’s alright. 
It helps me ask the 
next question. 

Like, ‘Where is my petri dish?’ Tashi hasn’t seen it either. 
I need to do the experiment again. 
Will you keep me company? 

          

          
I’m going to take some E.coli, grow it 
in a conical flask and see what happens 
when I don’t give it enough to eat. 
I’ll take another E.coli sample in a 
second flask and give it food.

      

      











Then I’ll wait and see what happens to the number of E.coli in both these flasks. 
This is called making an observation. 



          
After the experiment is completed, I’ll compare the E.coli growth in both the flasks 
and write down my observations. These are the results of my experiment. It will help me 
answer the question: Does the amount of food affect the growth of E.coli?
What I learn from the results is called an inference. A typical E.coli growth experiment 
takes 10 to 12 hours to complete.

      











Since I don’t need to sit here and watch the cells the entire time, 
I read about new discoveries, attend meetings and talk to other scientists 
about their work. This is important because I learn exciting new things from them 
and often get ideas for my own work. 



          
Sometimes, we also just sit around, have tea and chat!

      











Scientists may seem very serious, but really, we’re just like you and your friends. 


We like to play hockey, sing in the shower and read scary stories! 












We are also curious about the world around us. We like to ask questions constantly: 



          

          
Why? Why not? 

      

      
How?

          
What if?

      
We’re like detectives who look for clues 
that help answer all these fascinating questions.
Even if they’re inside your stomach. Speaking of which, 
I’m hungry. Let’s eat!











Tashi!












Grow your own mould!


The fungus that grows on old food is 
called mould. 
To grow your own mould, 
take a piece of leftover 
roti or a slice 
of stale bread, sprinkle it with water, 
place it on a plate and cover it with 
a clear glass bowl.

Keep at room temperature and out of 
direct sunlight 
for two days. Check the food 
and see if white, blue, 
green or gray fuzz 
has appeared on it. Leave it alone 
for 2 more 
days and then check on it. How does the
mould 
look now? Make a note. 
Repeat this every 
2 days 
until day 10.
 



          
What do you think will happen?
The water and room temperature create 
the perfect conditions for growing mould!
The mould will look different on different 
items of food. That is because different
kinds of mould spores like some foods 
better than others.
At the end of 10 days, carefully dispose of the
mouldy food with the help of your teacher.
Maybe you could add it to a compost pit!

      
