










Long, long ago, 

long before humans walked the Earth, 

the world was full of reptiles called dinosaurs.












There were reptiles that lived on land, 
swam in the sea, 

burrowed under the ground,

and even flew through the skies.













There were dinosaurs that were taller than buildings,

shorter than stools,

bigger than construction cranes,

and smaller than ducks.


They came in all shapes and sizes, just like humans!


          











The Ornithomimus
 
was the fastest dinosaur. 
It could run as fast as a scooter!


      











The Hadrosaur was the dinosaur with the most teeth. 
It had more than a thousand!

The Pentaceratops was the dinosaur 
with the biggest head. Its skull was 
bigger than a refrigerator!












The Quetzalcoatlus was the
biggest flying reptile. 

          
The distance from the tip of one wing 
to the other was longer than
 a telephone pole!

      

          











The Micropachycephalosaurus was the dinosaur with the longest name, but it was very 
small 
—
 no bigger than a 4-year-old human! 


      











The Therizinosaurus had the longest claws. 
Each claw was half as long as a bed!












The Argentinosaurus was one of the largest dinosaurs. 
It was larger than a cricket pitch!












The Shuvuuia was one of the smallest dinosaurs. 
It was the size of a hen! 


          











So, where are all the dinosaurs now?


      











Dinosaurs disappeared millions of years ago. No human has ever seen one. 
All that’s left of them are fossils, which are often buried deep
 underground. 
Scientists are still searching for fossils 
to learn more 
about these amazing creatures.


          

          
Dinosaurs existed for 175 million years
until Earth 
was struck by a meteor 65 million years ago, which 
slowly killed all the dinosaurs.


When the first dinosaur bone or fossil was
discovered 
in 1677, scientists thought it was from 
a giant man! 
By the 1800s, scientists began to realise that they 
belonged to a different species that no
longer existed. 
They called them ‘dinosaurs’ which
means ‘terrible lizards’ 
in Greek. 


Palaeontology, the study of animal and plant fossils, soon
became popular. Palaeontologists have discovered around
700 species of dinosaurs, and are still finding more.
Dinosaur fossils are most commonly found in China, 
South America and North America.


Do you want to see a dinosaur? Then look around
you. Many scientists believe that birds are descendants of
dinosaurs. Those terrible lizards are
still among us! 


      

      

      
