That shape over there is my Appa. He is sleeping.
To know him well, like I do, you have to use your ears more than
your eyes. You have to listen to Appa and his sounds carefully.

          











Hhh
hgh
ghh
hhh



      
When Appa sleeps, he breathes quietly. Like wind through leaves. I can make that sound by cupping my hands over my mouth and blowing gently. 
Hhho-hhha-hhho-hhha.
But sometimes, Appa snores as loud as thunder. I can snore like Appa by grunting through my nose like a pig and then flapping my lips like a horse. 
Kroaa-tbphpht-kroaa-tbphpht.

          











Hhho
-
hhha
-
hhho
-
hhha



      

          











Kroaa
-tbphpht
Kroaa
-tbphpht



      
When Appa wakes up, he scratches his arms and legs.
I can make this sound by tearing paper into small 
pieces.
Krrrsk-krrrsk-krrrsk-krrrsk.
When Appa stands up, the bones in his legs pop and crackle. Like cloth flapping in the wind. I clap with two fingers to make this sound. 
Khat-khat-khat-khat











Krrrsk-krrrsk

          

          











Krrrsk-krrrsk

      

      

          
Khat
-khat
-khat
-khat

      

          

          
Appa chews loudly with his mouth open. I stomp through slush after the rains to make this sound.
Squish-squash-squelch-squalch.
When Appa eats something hard, it makes a breaking, crushing sound. I step on dry leaves and twigs to make this sound. 
Karak-muruk-katak-latak.

      

      
Squish-squash
squelch-squalch

          
Karak
-
muruk
katak
-
latak

      
When Appa drinks water, the ball in his throat
rises and falls. It makes a deep, muffled sound.
When I go swimming and my ears get blocked,
everything sounds like Appa's drinking sound.
Guduk-guduk-guduk.

      

      

          
Guduk
Guduk
Guduk

      
After lunch, Appa burps from his mouth. This means the food was good. Appa's burps sound like slow lorries going up a hilly road. 
Rrraaahhhrrrhhh!
If Appa burps from his bum, then his stomach did not like the food. His bum burps are musical. I pull my cheeks back tightly and blow while keeping my mouth closed. 
Pheeeooooowoink!
Rrra
aahh
hrrr
hhh!

          
Pheeeoo
ooowoink!

      
 
If Appa's nose whistles, it means that he is getting a cold. He sometimes takes a sharp breath to clear his nose. When I drag a chair on the floor, it makes the same sound. 
Tststszszstztz!
When Appa is fully sick, his nose gets fully blocked.
He then has to pant from his mouth, like me when
I run very fast. 
Hhhun-hhhun-hhhun.
Hhhun-
hhhun-
hhhun

          
Tststszszstztz!

      
Appa has a large, loud laugh that can be heard three houses away. I roar like a hungry tiger-monkey to laugh like Appa. 
HROAHAHAHA!

          
HROAHAHAHA!

      
My favourite Appa sound is one he can't make alone.
He needs me to make that sound. It's when he kisses
my 
forehead with a loud, wet smack. 
MMMPPTZTZCHUAH!

          
MMM
PPT
ZTZCH
UAH!

      

          
How do ears hear sound?
Sound waves travel into the ear canal until they reach the eardrum. The eardrum passes the vibrations of the sound waves through the middle ear into the inner ear. The inner ear is shaped like a snail and is called the cochlea.
Finally, the sound waves reach the cochlea which contains thousands of tiny hair cells that can sense sound.
Sometimes the hair cells inside the cochlea get damaged and people may not be able to hear well. This can happen because of old age, injury or illness. A hearing aid is a small electronic device that can help such people hear better.

      
Inner Ear
Outer Ear
Middle Ear
Ear Canal
Ear Drum

          
How does a hearing aid work?
A hearing aid is worn in or behind the ear. It makes sounds louder using three basic parts: a microphone, an amplifier and a speaker.

      

          
1. 
Sound enters the hearing aid through the microphone.
2.
 The microphone passes on the sound to the amplifier, which increases its power and makes it louder.
3. 
These amplified sounds are then sent to the ear through the speaker.

      
Do you know of somebody who could benefit from using a hearing aid? Take them to your local ENT (ear nose throat) doctor for a checkup.
Microphone
Speaker
Volume Control
Amplifier
Battery
Earmold
Ear Hook
