Tring tring tringggg!
It was the last day of school. The students of Class 6 gathered around Didi's table for lunch. 
They passed food around and dipped into each other's dabbas. Ajay fed a roti to the school dog, Gundu.
"What are your plans for the summer vacation?" Didi asked the students. 
"I will practice my football skills, just like Messi," said Anita.
"I'm going to make lots of toys," said Rafiq.
"I'm going to eat vada-pav and samosa-kachori every day," said Vivek.
"I am going to Lonavala Adventure Park," said Pragati.
"They have so many rides there. Like the water slide and the train that goes up and down!" said Thomas. "And Pragati is going to ride them all."
"But the tickets are 60 rupees," said Faiza. "You are so rich Pragati."
"No," replied Pragati. "I am only spending the money that I saved."
"You can go to the amusement park too," said Didi, smiling. "You just have to save like Pragati did."
"Yes," agreed Pragati. "If we save just one rupee every day, it can add up to a big amount."
"Saving a rupee a day is easy," said Seema. "Let's try? Then maybe all of us can go to the adventure park."
Everyone agreed. When the holidays ended, they would go to the adventure park together.
Summer holidays were full of fun.
Rafiq made toys from whatever he found lying around. He sold some of them to his cousins, and saved one rupee for every day of the holiday.
Prasad taught his younger brother maths, and saved one rupee each day from the money his father gave him for it.
Devi saved one rupee every day from the ice cream money her mami gave her.
Ajay's father was the head gardener for the municipality gardens. He gave Ajay one rupee for every sapling that he helped him plant.
It was the first day of school. Didi helped the class add up the money that they had saved.
Each student had saved enough to buy themselves a ticket. Everyone celebrated, except Ajay.
"What happened, Ajay? Are you not happy with how much you saved?" asked Anjali.
"I didn't save any money," Ajay replied. "Gundu fell sick last week, so I spent all my savings to buy him medicines. And now I have no money for the adventure park."
The class fell silent. 
Finally, Nimbaram spoke up. "Don't worry, Ajay. We can all save a little more together and buy you a ticket."
Nimbaram was right. Within a week, Class 6 had saved enough money for Ajay's ticket!
Finally, Class 6 was at the amusement park.
"AAAAAA!" Rafiq and Prasad squealed from the giant wheel.
Whooosh! Faiza splashed out of the water slide.
Schoop! Ajay and Anita shot out of the water coaster.
Class 6 had a great time, and all because they had saved one rupee a day!
How do I start saving?
1. Decide on a fixed amount of money you can save in a day or a week. It can be as low or as high as you please.
2. Make a piggy bank out of a small box or an old tin to keep the money you save safely.
3. Resist the temptation to take money out of it!
4. Keep a record of how you are spending your money. This will help you see if you can spend less and save even more.
