A boy is standing on Earth. His name is Madhav. He's in India. It's the middle of the day.
It's bright. It's hot. The sun is straight above his head.
Way, way above
his head.
Under Madhav's feet, all the way through
the ground, on the other side of the planet...
Equator
South Pole
a girl is standing on Earth.
Her name is Yaretzi.
She's in Mexico.
It's night. 
It's dark.
It's still pretty hot though.
North Pole

          
The sun is shining only on Madhav's side of the world.

      
Yaretzi is on the other side
of Earth. Her side is in shadow.
But why isn't Yaretzi asleep?
"Me gusta mucho mirar las estrellas*."
*'Me gusta mucho mirar las estrellas' means 'I like to look at
the stars' in Spanish.
Direction of rotation
East
West
Axis of rotation
Earth is always rotating, turning round and round on its axis.
Six hours later...
In India, the Sun is not over Madhav's head anymore. It's setting in the west. The stars are starting to come out.
In Mexico, at just about the same time,
Yaretzi sees the Sun rising in the east. The sky
is brightening and the stars are fading.
Madhav decides to give Yaretzi a phone call.
"Good evening, Yaretzi! I mean, good morning, for you."
"Buenos días*, Madhav! I mean, buenas noches**, for you. Are you watching the sunset?"
"Yes! Beautiful! Are you watching the sunrise?"
"Yes, beautiful."
*'Buenos días' means 'good day' in Spanish.
**'Buenas noches' means 'good night' in Spanish.

          
          
Six hours later...
In India, it's the middle of the night. Madhav is fast asleep.
In Mexico, it's the middle of the day. The sun is right overhead.
Yaretzi wishes it was night-time.
"Extraño las estrellas*."

      
      
*'Extraño las estrellas' means 'I miss the stars' in Spanish.
Yaretzi decides to give Madhav a call.
"Hi, Madhav."
"Huh... Wha–?" Madhav mumbles, sleepily.
"It's the middle of the night."
"Well, for you it is, I know," replies Yaretzi.
"Will you go outside and look at the stars for me?"
"You want me to...?"
"Go outside and say hi to the stars. Tell them
I'll see them soon."
Madhav goes to his balcony and looks up at
the sky. "Hi, stars," he says. "Yaretzi says
she'll see you soon." Then he goes back to sleep.
Six hours later...
Madhav wakes up. He sees the sun
rising in the east. The sky is brightening
and the stars are fading.
"Bye-bye," he says.
In Mexico, the sun is not over Yaretzi's
head anymore. It's setting in the west.
The stars are starting to come out.
"Los extrañé a todos*," says Yaretzi.
"We got your message," the stars
twinkle back.
*'Los extrañé a todos' means 'I missed you all' in Spanish.

          
Why can't Madhav and Yaretzi see the stars at the same time?
Earth is always rotating on its axis.
As it turns, different sides of the planet face the Sun and receive its light. Whichever side receives the Sun’s light has day, while the other side has night. Mexico and India
are almost exactly on opposite sides of Earth. That is why whenever it is daytime
for Madhav, it is night-time for Yaretzi.

      
