Junuka is visiting her Anaideo's* village during the holidays.
She has decided to grow some rice for her school project.
"Be careful of the rice rakshasas," Anaideo tells her.
Everyone in the village is afraid of the rice rakshasas.
*'Anaideo' means grandmother in Assamese.
But Junuka is not afraid.
Junuka must plough the field before she sows the rice seeds.
"This will take all day. I wish I had some help," she thinks.
Suddenly, she senses something creeping towards her...
KHAS

          
KHAS

      
KHAS
"AAAAAA!" shouts Junuka. "Rice rakshasa!"
The rakshasa flashes its claws and...
"Aha! Your soil is ready for planting."
SCRATCH
SCRATCH
SCRATCH
SCRATCH
SCRATCH
SCRATCH
"I'm Trakshasur," says the rice rakshasa.
"Climb on, I'll help you sow the seeds."
Junuka thinks for a minute. Then she climbs on Trakshasur's back.
He carries her as she scatters the seeds. They flood the field with water.
Over time, the seeds become seedlings.
"Time to move them to the big field," says Trakshasur.
Junuka pulls out the seedlings and Trakshasur bundles them up.
Now they go to get the big field ready.
Trakshasur ploughs the big field and Junuka floods it.
The soil becomes soft, muddy and ready for planting.
Then Junuka hears a slimy, wet sound...
"SLLUUUUUURRP!"
"AAAAAA!" shouts Junuka. "Rice Rakshasa!"

          
"This is Plantasur. She will help us plant," says Trakshasur.
Plantasur picks up the seedlings with her long, red tongue.
She bites the mud. She plants dozens of seedlings with every bite.
Soon the field is full 
of seedlings
.

      
Junuka puts up scarecrows to protect the seedlings.

          
The rice grains bloom and soon it is harvest time. Junuka hears a sound in the bushes...
DRRRRRRRRRRRRRR
"AAAAAA!" shouts Junuka. "Rice rakshasa!"
"This is Harvasur. She will help us
harvest," Plantasur 
tells her
.

      
THWACK!
CRUNCH!
THOOO!
Harvasur cuts the crop,
traps the stem and
spits out the straw.
Until there is a mountain of grain.
"Now we must remove the husk from the grain," says Harvasur. "Come, let's visit our friend Dhanasur at the mill."
They find Dhanasur in a dark corner of the mill.
He's a rakshasa with two heads.
"Hello," says Junuka.
"AAAAAAAAAAAAAAA!"
shouts Dhanasur. "A human child!"
"This is Junuka. You have to help her," says Harvasur.
Dhanasur opens one mouth wide and Junuka pours rice into it.
Finally, they have shiny, white rice.
That night, there is a harvest feast at the village.
Junuka brings the rakshasas with her. 
Junuka shows the villagers all the rice they harvested together. 
"The rakshasas only want to help us," she says.
BURRRRRRRRRRRRP!
Junuka has a great time at the feast. And so do the rice rakshasas!

          
Machines used in rice farming
Rice farming is a long and difficult process.
But with the help 
of her four friends, Junuka can grow rice easily.
Just like the four rakshasas, 
these machines 
make farming quicker and easier
:

      
Mechanical plough
Like Trakshasur, this machine helps farmers to loosen and prepare the soil for sowing rice seeds.
Rice transplanter
Like Plantasur,
this machine helps the farmer plant rice seedlings.
Combine harvester
Like Harvasur, this machine cuts the crop, collects it and separates the stems from the rice grains.
Rice husker
Like Dhanasur,
this machine removes the brown husk from the grain to give us white rice.
