
          
The Internet is an amazing network. 
People use it to do lots of different things.
Whenever you use the Internet to watch a video or send a message,
your phone or computer sends and receives data.

      
Your data can be any information about you, from your favourite ice cream flavour
to your birth date, your email password or your bank account number.
Your passwords and personal information are sensitive data. It is very important
that sensitive data is kept secret.

          
This is because there are people on the Internet who might try to steal it!

      
People who try to steal data are called hackers.
Hackers steal data for many different reasons.
Meet Agent B. He’s a black hat hacker.
Black hat hackers steal data in order to harm people or help themselves.
Agent B might steal your email password and send fake emails from your account.
New Mail
To:
Sub:
CC|BCC
Congratulations!
You won 50,000 rupees!
Hit REPLY to get your money.
Reply
He might also steal your bank information and take money right out of your bank account.
And who is that, sitting on the fence? That’s Agent G. He’s a grey hat hacker.
Grey hat hackers steal data too, but they will not always use it to harm you.

          
They may hack you first, and then offer to show you how to better protect your data—for a price. If you don’t agree, they might decide to harm you.

      
But don’t worry! There are other people who work to protect people like you from hackers on the Internet. Meet Agent W. She is a white hat hacker.
She ‘attacks’ the security systems that protect data in order to test them.
This helps Agent W to find weaknesses and fix them.
Click!
Click!
By doing this, Agent W and white hat hackers like her make sure that your data is protected.
They make the Internet a safer place for everyone.

          
You too can help white hat hackers 
keep you safe on the Internet!
•
Keep your password, name, address, the name of your school or any information about your family safe.
•
It is important not to talk to strangers on the Internet or share any personal information with them.
•
Don’t join any social media websites without the permission of a parent or guardian.
•
If someone tries to send you something inappropriate online, tell a grown-up you trust, like a parent,
family member or a teacher. 
•
Don’t share pictures of yourself online without your parents’ permission.
•
Don’t download or install anything on your computer without your parents’ permission.
•
If you have any questions about something you read, ask your parent or guardian.
•
If you are talking to someone online and they make you uncomfortable, remember you don’t have to
talk back to them!

      
