Nozy crept out of
Nikhil’s pocket…
“Ahhhhhh! Nikhil, keep your rat away from me!” yelled his sister.
Startled, Nozy leapt at the sink but fell into 
the toilet bowl instead.

          
Whooooosh!

      
Nozy splashed into an underground pit.
As he got used to the darkness, 
he saw another rat.
“Hey! You’re new here. I’m Cheeky. What’s your name?
Want to look around?” she said.
“I’m N…Nozy… Where am I?” asked Nozy.
“Underground inspection chamber. It’s where the toilet
and kitchen pipes join the sewer,” said Cheeky.
SPLAT!
 Nozy was covered in foam.
“You’re lucky that wasn’t poo. Heehee hoohoo!” laughed Cheeky.

          
Cheeky and Nozy darted into a pipe. They jumped into a round pit.
It had large and small pipes going in and out of it.

      

          
“Small pipes carry wastewater from each building
to this large pipe,” said Cheeky.

      
“Look, a manhole!” Cheeky said.
Nozy looked up, “A man with holes? Where? Where?” 
“Calm down, it’s just a hole in the street.
Humans use it to check and repair the sewer.”

      
They scurried through the sewer.
“Ugh! This really stinks,” said Nozy.
“Oh, it’s just poisonous gases.
Don’t breathe too hard,” said Cheeky.
“Come on!” 
They sped on until...

          
SPLASH!
Nozy fell into the canal where the sewer ended. Cheeky dove in too.
The water flowed through a grill. But Cheeky and Nozy were held back, along with
a heap of nappies, plastic covers, water bottles and a very large armchair.
“You wouldn’t believe what else ends up here,” said Cheeky.
“Once the whole sewer was stuffed with report cards.”

      

          
“What happened then?” asked Nozy.
“The grill filtered out the trash, and it was removed and recycled.”
Cheeky and Nozy climbed over the pile and sat on the canal wall.

      
Nozy rubbed up against the wall to clean himself. “I like my fur soft and clean,” he said.
“In the sewers, we say the dirtier the better,” said Cheeky. “Want to see something fun?”
They ran along the canal wall to a long, narrow tank. “That’s the grit tank. Can you see the floating dirt sinking to the bottom?”

          
GRIT TANK

      

          
To landfill

      
Cheeky pointed to another tank. “If any dirt escapes from the grit tank,
it settles down in this one and is removed. This is the sedimentation tank.”

          
“Look! Rainbows on the water!” gasped Nozy. 
“Oh, that’s just floating oil,” said Cheeky.

      

          
SEDIMENTATION TANK

      

          
To filtration tank

      
To trickler filter
Cheeky and Nozy scurried past the grit and sedimentation tanks.
Nozy pointed to a circular tank ahead. “Hey, It’s raining over there!”
“That’s just the trickler filter,” said Cheeky. “It’s full of good bacteria.
When water goes through the pebbles, the bacteria eat the dirt and clean the water.”
TRICKL
ER
FILTER

          
To oxidation tank

      
OXIDATION TANK
Nozy spotted another tank.
“Is that a magic cauldron?” he cried. “It’s bubbling!”
“No, those are oxygen bubbles,” said Cheeky. “That’s the oxidation tank. Oxygen is pumped into the water to make the good bacteria grow.”

          

          
To settlement tank

      

      
Finally, they reached the last two tanks. Cheeky pointed 
at the first one,
“That’s the settlement tank, where 
leftover dirt settles down.”
“What happens in the other one?” asked Nozy.

          
SETTLEMENT TANK

      
To outlet in the sea

          
“In the filtration tank, water flows through a bed
of charcoal to remove the stink. Then a sand bed
traps the last bits of dirt.”

      
FILTRATION TANK
Air Vent
To outlet in the sea
SPLAWHOOSH!
 The water flowed from the filtration tank into the sea.
“That almost looks clean!” said Nozy. They tumbled out onto the beach.
Sniff, sniff!
“I can smell bhelpuri,” said Cheeky.
“And I can smell Nikhil!” said Nozy.
