
          
“Let’s go!” says Reireidaar. 
It is the tradition of the Uipo tribe that the eldest daughter of the family is the first to cut the harvest. Now it is November and today is Reireidaar’s day. 


      
Paa and Nu have invited Reireidaar’s uncle and aunties to help with the harvest. “Khulpu was right. This year’s harvest is great,” says Paa.
“Of course, 17 years of being fallow has made Ramdaang’s fields fertile again,” says Mosyel Uncle. 
Everyone walks towards Ramdaang, the mountain range.  


          


The family elders sing as they walk together

—




      



          
“The men cut the trees low to the ground. 
The off shoots will be strong again.
The forest will grow strong again. 
The sky was clear and bright! 
The fire was great! 
The woods had dried through and through!”  


      
      


          


Reireidaar listened to the song of the elders. In
February, they had all come together to clear the
forest. Just before the rains, the elders had burnt
the wo
ods.


      


As they draw closer to Bun, the field hut, the
elders sing even more loudly and merrily.
Rereidaar looks around the rice field and
spots something on the meimang.



It’s the biggest pumpkin she has
ever seen!
Behind the big pumpkin she sees
many others. But oh, some of them
have holes in them!
“Aehe, those prickly porcupines
must have eaten this,” she says. 

          

Suddenly, a mongoose
runs across the field.





      
“Or maybe it was that mongoose!” says Reireidaar.
She picks up a tree branch and says, “I am going to protect you all. These are my vegetables, and this is my kingdom.”  

Lost in protecting her kingdom, she does not hear her name being called. "It’s getting late,” says Paa. “Let Techa Tenaishim cut the first harvest if we can’t find Reireidaar. The sun will soon be over our heads.” Techa Tenaishim is Reireidaar’s eldest cousin. 


Reireidaar sees the elders forming a circle and realizes that Techa Tenaishim is going to cut the first harvest, instead of her.  



“Nooooooo,” cries Reireidaar, taking the sickle from her cousin. “I’ll do it! I know it is my duty, Nu.”

Reireidaar cuts a bundle of paddy and hands it to Nu. “I have to go now. My kingdom needs me!”  

 
 
 
Uipo and Indigenous Shifting Cultivation 
 



          

          

          
With 2,800 members, the Uipo are one of the smallest
indigenous communities
 
of Manipur. Since time immemorial,
they have practiced Hing Lou, shifting 
cultivation. Chaa
Kathad is the symbolic first cutting of paddy with which
the 
harvest begins and it’s done by the eldest daughter.
Every year, Khulpu, 
the spiritual leader, picks a mountain
range that the whole village then 
cultivates. They avoid
cultivating in the same range for at least 13 years. 
This gap
brings the forest back to life. 


      

      

      


Shifting Cultivation Through the Year


January 
Preparations begin, such as the sharpening of tools.  



          
February
Once a range is picked, trees are cut and the wood is left to dry.    

      

          
March 
Fire lines are made and the dried trees 
and shrubs are burnt before the rain 
comes. The ash fertilizes 


the land. 
 


      

          

          


 
April

Unburnt wood is collected 
and placed in small circles 
and burnt again. These circles are called meimang. The Bun, a hut with a balcony, is built in the middle of the field.
 





      

      

          
May 
After the first rain, the grain is sown to bring a good yield.  


      
 July–October 
Regular weeding is carried out  

November 
Pang, the granary, is built, and the harvest is collected.  


          


December
The harvest is
transported to the
home granary, Kei.


      
