
          
The Dordles were lost and needed fuel to get home. 
They had tried coal, wood and oil as fuel but they were of little help. 
The Dordles needed to find a better fuel to take them home.

      
Fuel like coal took millions of years to form.
There was very little coal left on Earth.
So the Dordles went looking for fuel that
was there in plenty and would never run out.
Dordle B set sail for the seas looking for energy sources.
Along the way, he found:
Rivers

          
Dams

      
Tides
Waterfalls
Dordle D took to the skies and realised
that she could harness the energy of
the wind and use it to power their ship.
Dordle E packed his bags and said goodbye to the 
others. 
He would travel to the Sun and steal its fire. 
Sadly he didn’t make it all the way to the Sun, 
but did find a way to use its energy.
The Dordles found all sorts
of new sources of energy.
Like geothermal energy, using
the heat from under the earth.
And nuclear energy, which they got by
splitting very small particles called atoms.
They built devices that helped
them better harness energy.
After months of trying, the Dordles finally had the 
energy they needed. 
They turned on their engines, fastened their 
seatbelts, lifted off,
and zoomed away from Earth.

          
What Is Renewable Fuel?
Renewable energy is collected from
renewable sources in nature. Sunlight,
wind, rain, waves and geothermal energy
(heat from the ground) are always around
us, regardless of 
how much we use them.


Biofuel is made from agricultural,
industrial and domestic waste.
 
We can harness 
energy from these sources and use it to 
power our houses, vehicles and factories. 
Energy from these sources is less 
polluting.

      
What Is Nuclear Fuel?
Nuclear fuels are used in power plants
to generate heat and electricity. Heat is
created when the nuclear fuel undergoes
nuclear fission. This is where an atom with
a large nucleus is split into two or more
atoms with smaller nuclei. The nuclear
fission reaction produces a lot of heat,
which is then used to generate electricity.
Nuclear energy is not renewable since the
nuclear fuel has to be mined.
