
          
It was nap time at
the nursery school.

      
While the rest of her
classmates were asleep,
four-year-old Mohana
watched an army of ants
marching in a row.

          
Mohana gently picked up the ants in her palm,
and discovered they have a distinct odour,
an unpleasant one.

      

          
She often watched the
praying mantis sitting on
the wall, move its foreleg from
side to side, waiting for its prey.

      

          
She carried green grasshoppers on the back of
her palm when they accidentally hopped indoors.

      
On rainy days, she squatted by the 
swarms of termites on the floor and 
felt their wings with her fingertips.
She watched as their wings fell off and
the insects walked away, untroubled.

          
Mohana longed to become a
scientist who studies insects.

      

          
Years later, she studied zoology, joined the
Zoological Survey of India and became an
entomologist pursuing taxonomy.

      
An entomologist studies insects. Some entomologists study insect
taxonomy. They identify and organise different species of insects by
shape, by size, by pattern and even the way they develop over time.
Mohana’s job took her
to the deepest jungles.
No one had seen women travel to
far-flung remote areas for forest surveys,
but Mohana had become an entomologist to
discover unusual species of insects.
On her first forest survey, she wore flimsy shoes, which 
gave way, and she had to walk through the forest, barefoot.
This taught her never to step out without a pair of good field shoes.

			
It was twilight in the Wayanad hills when Mohana saw a banyan tree sparkling as though 
lit up by stars. As she tiptoed near it, she spotted thousands of fireflies.

		

          
Deep in the Aralam Wildlife Sanctuary 
in Kannur, 
she came across a resting 
population of migrating milkweed butterflies. 
There were also thousands of blue tiger 
butterflies 
on low branches of a tree. 
Sensing movement, all the butterflies set to
flight as one, as Mohana gasped in wonder.

      

          
Mohana’s work drove her to study the tiny wasps
that belonged to the Hymenoptera insect family.

      

          
The wasps were so minuscule that they couldn’t be
identified without a microscope, but they played an
important role in maintaining balance in the ecosystem.

      
She studied their habits,

          

          
published research papers on them and
discovered over 150 new species.

      

      
Mohana even had a species named
after her, 
Dipara mohanae
.

          
From wasps to termites,
the more species Mohana found,
the more she wanted to discover.

      
Insects are pollinators, pests, soil engineers and
more — they influence human lives in many ways.
Being an entomologist, Rajmohana Keloth
knows and appreciates this every day.
Get to know Mohana
May 9, 1971:
 Rajmohana Keloth’s birthday.
1975:
 Mohana’s first memory of observing insects.
1993:
 Mohana completes her post graduation in zoology specialising as an entomologist.
1994:
 She gets her dream job and joins the Zoological Survey of India (ZSI)
           as a junior research fellow.
1996:
 Discovers four unknown species of insects and 
           has her first 
new species publication.
1999:
 Gets her PhD degree and joins postdoctoral research.
2004:
 Rejoins the Zoological Survey of India as a scientist 
           and has worked there ever since.
Mohana’s favourite bugs
Nasute termite soldier
Click beetle
Bumblebee
Stream glory damselfly
Antlion
Clearwing moth
