
            
Why don’t bulbuls comb their hair?
It looks like a little wave.

        

            
If I had a bulbul’s hair,
I would wear clips.

        

            
Why don’t hoopoes comb their hair?
It looks like a frilly fan.

        

            
If I had a hoopoe's hair,
I would push it back with a band.

        

            
If I had a spoonbill's hair,
I would plait it all together.

        

            
Why don't spoonbills comb their hair?
It looks like an old paintbrush.

        

            
Why don’t monals comb their hair?
It looks like a tiny broom.

        

            
If I had a monal’s hair,
I would tie it up with ribbons.

        

            
Why don't fish owls comb their hair?
It looks like two furry worms.

        

            
If I had a fish owl’s hair,
I would make two ponytails.

        

            
Why don't drongos comb their hair?
It looks like a messy mop.

        
If I had a drongo’s hair,
I would oil it well and brush it down.

            
Why don’t hornbills have hair to comb?
They look like they're wearing helmets.

        

            
If I had a hornbill’s helmet,
I would ride around all day.

        

            
Why don’t vultures have any hair?
They look so bald.

        

            
If I had a vulture’s head,
I would never have to comb my hair!

        

            
Meet The Birds That Have Funny Hair

        
Common Hoopoe
Indian Vulture
Himalayan Monal
Eurasian Spoonbill
Red-whiskered Bulbul
Brown Fish Owl
Racket-tailed Drongo
Great Indian Hornbill

            

            
Crests are useful in many ways. 
They make birds look attractive. 
Some birds can open and fold their crests to send signals to other birds. 
Some open their crests when they want to frighten away other birds and animals.

        

        
Some birds 
look
 like they have hair on their heads. But their hair is not like ours. 
Instead, each hair is just a very thin feather. 
A group of such feathers is called a crest.
Do birds really have hair?

            
The hornbill’s helmet is called a casque (rhymes with mask). Like 
ear-tufts and crests, casques make hornbills look good. This helps them find mates. A hornbill’s casque also makes its beak stronger. With a strong beak, hornbills can pick and eat fruits more easily.

        

            
The furry worms on the owl’s head are called ear-tufts. They are not really ears, just bits of skin covered with feathers. These help owls hide more easily, making them look like they are part of a tree. The ear-tufts also help them look attractive (to other owls) or scary (to other birds and animals).

        
