

Aiman loves machines! 
She likes looking at them, 
she likes drawing them, 
she likes reading about them.



            


“You’ve turned into a machine!” her grandfather says.
“I’m part machine and part human,” says Aiman. 
“I’m a cyborg, Dadu!”


“What is a cyborg?”




        


“A cyborg is short for ‘cybernetic organism’.
It is a living thing with artificial body parts that can be controlled by the nervous system.”



Dadu is curious and wants to know how human beings can function with artificial body parts.



“Scientists in a field called bionics study the way different parts of the human body work, and design machines to copy these actions.

Organs that aren’t working the way they should can be replaced or supported by these bionic parts,” says Aiman.




Aiman shows Dadu a drawing of the human body.
“Some bionic devices have been in use for years,” she says.

            


Dadu has heard of some of these devices.
A dialysis machine filters blood if the kidneys aren’t functioning.
A pacemaker helps the human heart beat 
in a regular rhythm and pump blood.



        


“Can bionics make me stronger?” he asks. 
“Can it help me fly like a bird or run like a cheetah?”



“No!” Aiman laughs. “But a lost arm or leg can be replaced with a bionic limb that you can control with your brain.’



"What if I lost my hearing? My voice? 
My sight or my sense of taste?" Dadu wonders.
Aiman has the answers:



            


A bionic ear implant to allow Dadu to listen to his favourite radio programmes! 
A bionic voice box so he can sing along!
A bionic eye to help him choose the best fruit from the market!
A bionic tongue to taste that fruit!



        


“But there are some human organs which cannot be replaced with machines yet,” adds Aiman. 
The human nose, she tells Dadu, can detect up to 10,000 different smells and sends signals to the brain to identify them. Creating a machine as efficient and powerful as the nose may take a while to perfect. 




“Bionics has made great progress 
and is changing 
the human body, Dadu. 

            


Dadu has a question.  
“Aiman, do you think…



        


One day, we could 
all 
become cyborgs,” 
says Aiman.




...I am a cyborg already?”


            


What do you think?


        


No, Dadu is NOT a cyborg! 
False teeth are not machines that interact with his brain and nervous system. But here are some people from around the world who could be cyborgs.



Artist 
Neil Harbisson
 was born with extreme colour blindness or achromatopsia. But he can hear colours that other humans cannot even imagine! This is because of a special antenna connected to his skull that lets him sense colours through sounds and vibrations. He can even connect to the internet with the antenna or have his friends phone his brain.


Emily Borghard
 used to suffer fits due to severe epilepsy. A small computer fixed to her brain in 2013 has helped her lead a healthy life.
