Shunti loves to sit in sunny patches.
Her favourite spot is on the wall by the gate. From here, she can see...
Tapan’s mother drying wool
Arka washing her sports shoes

            
Tapan drying his hair

        
Vijay selling fish
Today, Shunti can see Arka, Tapan and his grandfather pulling out weeds.
“Can you wheel me to that sunny patch, please?” asks Dadaji. “Sunlight is good for my bones. And yours!”
Arka and Tapan wheel Dadaji to the warm and bright garden.
“Wheeee!” they squeal.
“Faster, faster!” says Dadaji.
“Careful, careful!” shouts Tapan’s mother.
Shunti’s gaze is on Vijay. “Quicker, quicker,” purrs Shunti. She is so hungry!
Today, it is raining.
“Oh no, my rangoli!” wails Arka.
“Yuck, my shirt,” says Tapan.
“Oh ho, my pickle!” cries Tapan’s mother.
Shunti is also upset. Now how will Vijay bring fish?

            

            

            
Hungry Shunti perches near the stove.
Papadams, vegetables and spices. Yuck!
Murabba, jams and pickles. 
Tcha!
That’s when she sniffs, looks up and sees...

        

        

        
Aha!
 A jar of sun-dried fish!

            

            

            
Today, the sun is out! Yoohoo!
“Do you want to make some sun art?” asks Dadaji.
Arka and Tapan run to get all the things he asks for: 
a sheet of black chart paper, f
lat and heavy things like stones and coins.

        

        

        
They arrange some leaves, twigs, stones and coins on the chart paper, making a pattern. 
“Leav
e it in the sun for four hours,” says Dadaji.
Shunti wonders what will happen in four hours.

        

            

            

            
“My busy little workers! Like you, the sun has done a lot of work today," says Dadaji. 

        

        

        
The sun has made Dadaji’s lap warm.
Mmmmmm... Shunti loves the sun!
Shall we make some 
hibiscus tea?
Here’s what you’ll need:
 - A glass jar with a lid
 - Petals from four red hibiscus flowers
 - One litre of drinking water
 - Four spoons of sugar
Here's what you should do:
Fill the jar with clean water.
Wash the petals of the flowers and drop them into the water.
Close the lid and shake the bottle. Leave it in the sun for three hours.
Add sugar and stir.
Your hibiscus tea is ready! Drink up!

            

            
Sunny days are happy days
 - 
The sun is a star. It gives us light and heat.
 - 
It’s the sun’s light and heat that makes plants grow.
 - 
A bit of morning sun on our skin every day is good for  our health.
 - 
The sun is VERY, VERY far away from the earth, but it still gives us the energy we need!
 - 
Scientists ‘catch’ the sun’s energy and use it in many        ways. But you and I can use it by just playing in the sun.

        

        
