Razia and her Ummachi live on an island far out in the ocean.
Ummachi wants Razia to learn how to swim.
But Razia is scared of being in water. The ocean is sooooo large and deep!
Today, the waves are small. So Ummachi takes Razia to the lagoon.
“Razia, please get in! The lagoon is shallow,” says Ummachi.
“Can I learn to swim next time, Ummachi? Pleeeeeease!”

          

            
“Don’t be scared, Razia. See how all the animals swim. Try moving your legs and arms just like them.”
Razia peers into the water. 
So many 
colourful
 animals are all around her!
Thooooo!
 The water is very salty.

        

      
Razia takes a deep breath and dips her head in the water.
She watches the animals swim. Just as Ummachi had told her to.

          
A baby turtle swims by, kicking her legs and pushing the water aside with her flippers. 
Razia tries to swim like the turtle. She accidentally gulps some water.
“Ummachi, the water stings!” cries Razia.
“It will get easier,” says Ummachi.

      
The next day, a baby octopus jets by. He draws water in and pushes his eight arms forward.
Razia tries to swim just like the octopus.
“Watch me kick my legs, Ummachi!” yells Razia.
“Good! Keep trying.”
She swallows some water. 
Ugghh!
But she tries again.

          

            
The next day an eagle ray soars by, flapping her triangular wings.
Razia tries to swim like the ray. She swallows some water, and sinks a 
little 
—
blub-blub-blub.
“This is so difficult, Ummachi!” says Razia.
“Keep trying, Razia!” 
Razia tries again. And again.

        

      
The next day, some plankton float by. They have no flippers or wings. They move with the waves.
Razia stretches her arms and legs. She floats like the plankton.
“Ummachi, watch me float!” shouts Razia.
“That’s great, Razia!
The next day, an eel wiggles by. He swings from side to side, like a snake. 
Razia tries to swim like the eel.
“Razia, you are swimming!” 
says Ummachi.
The next day, a flying fish leaps by. She glides through the air.
Razia tries to swim like the flying fish. She flails and crashes into the water.
“My arms and legs hurt, Ummachi!” says Razia.
“Once you remember to breathe while swimming, your arms and legs will move slower. Then it will hurt less.”
The next day, a dolphin zips by. He comes to the surface of the water, breathes deeply and then dives.
Razia tries to swim like the dolphin. She lifts her head out of water, gulps some air and dives back in.
As the days go by, Razia watches more and more animals swim. She learns many new moves.
Razia kicks. She floats. She wiggles. She dives.
She holds her breath for longer and longer.
She swims faster and faster.

          
“
Razia, it's time to go!
” yells Ummachi.
“Can I swim just a little bit longer? Pleeease, Ummachi?”

      

          
Have You Tried Swimming?
Different animals have different ways of moving through water.

      
Tuna and dolphins are shaped to shoot through the water with great speed.
Tiny plankton drift wherever the water takes them.
Squid and octopuses draw water in and expel it very fast.

          
Try some of these moves the next time you step into the water!

      
Eagle rays flap their wings.

            
Crabs and lobsters walk on the seafloor.

        
Flying fish leap out of water to escape predators.
