 Lakshmi’s palms were raw from the weight of the bags she carried. One bag had half a kilo of potatoes, and the other, half a kilo of tomatoes and a sliver of ash gourd. 
And home was still half a kilometre away. She put the bags down by a shopfront to rest. 




A balloon seller was 
walking by, shouting, 
“Balooooneee – 
colour-colour baloooonee.” 
How easily he carried
the lot. If only her bags 
were full of air!

 Then Lakshmi thought back to her science class. That afternoon, Ammu Miss had said air had weight. “One cubic metre* of air weighs 1.2 kg,” she had said.
 


*1 cubic metre is the volume of a cube that measures 100 cm x 100 cm x 100 cm.




That seemed like a lot – nearly as heavy as her two bags. If air had weight, wouldn’t she feel it?

 When she got home, Lakshmi decided to find out. Gowri, her little sister, could help her. 
Lakshmi pulled out twelve sticks from the new broom by the kitchen sink. Using a ruler, she made sure each one was 100 cm long. And she stuck them to make a cube. 




Lakshmi and Gowri used the cube as a frame and taped up old newspaper till all its sides were covered.



‘Now, this should have 1.2 kilograms of air!’
Lakshmi thought. Then she lay down under it to check if she could feel its
weight. She couldn’t feel a thing! But when Gowri put the vegetable bags on
Lakshmi’s chest, she could feel them pressing down on her.




Next, Lakshmi blew
a balloon and dropped it. If air did have weight, a full balloon should fall
faster than an empty one, right? But the balloon didn’t fall at all. It floated
away. Lakshmi ran behind it.




 She took the balloon along to the primary health centre. While Gowri was getting a vaccination, Lakshmi stood on the weighing scale in the doctor’s office – she weighed 19 kg. Then she carefully put the balloon on the machine. The needle didn’t move. 



















“Air has no weight,
Miss,” she declared in class the next day. “You can’t feel its weight.”


“You can feel air
when it moves,” said the teacher, puffing away a strand of hair from her
forehead. She pointed towards the leaves dancing in the wind and the grey
clouds hiding the sun. “And air moves things.”





















“As for feeling its weight,” said Ammu Miss, “let’s
find out today. She scribbled a note and handed it to a student. “Shyam, could
you go and get three packets of thick balloons, please? Class, come on, let’s clear
this place for our experiment.”


 The students moved the chairs and tables to a corner and created space in the middle of the room. Ammu Miss found a cubical cardboard box. She measured its sides and announced, “The volume of this box is roughly one cubic metre. Let’s blow the balloons and put them into this box.” 
 The students huffed and puffed, and scrunched their faces and twisted the balloons for half an hour. 
Some balloons floated away. 
Some balloons slowly 
lost air. 
PHAT!
 Some balloons burst. 
 
Ammu Miss stood by the box and watched the students fill it up with the
 inflated balloons. 



















Once the box was
full, she tied the balloons together with a string to make a giant ball.
Carrying this, the students trooped to the Principal’s office, where the
weighing machine was.























Lakshmi stood on
it – she still weighed 19 kg. As she struggled to hold the giant globe Ammu
Miss gave her, the class looked closely at the number below. Did the needle
twitch? Yes, it looked like it had moved a little beyond 19 kg*.


*The weight of
air can vary a little from place to place.





**The rubber of the balloon has some weight too.
***Why do you think the needle moved so little? Do you think the air outside pushing back on the balloon had anything to do with it?
 Ammu Miss took a pin and poked five of the balloons. Lakshmi was startled, but soon began to laugh. The class cheered as Ammu Miss burst the rest of the balloons. When she finished, the needle on the weighing machine had moved back a little. 


Lakshmi was happy. It had been proved in class today that air did have weight. Before the bell rang, she had one more question:




















“Miss, if air has
weight then why do balloons float when they’re full, and fall when they burst?”


What do you think?























Did you know, there are more air molecules around us in the atmosphere
than the total number of grains of sand on all the beaches in the world! Many
of these particles collide with us and push against us.























How is it that we
never feel the weight of these air molecules?
 
From the time we are
born, our bodies adjust to the pressure of air molecules on them. Our bodies
are made up of bones, muscles, fluids and a lot of air and exert as much
pressure outwards against the air molecules. This is why we do not feel the
weight of air on us. We only feel it when the air pressure changes, like when
we are on a flight or high up on a mountain.




Let’s play with air!
Take an empty mineral water bottle or any other bottle made of thin plastic. Drill a hole in the cap, insert a straw into it and seal it with clay. Or seal the mouth of the bottle with clay and poke a straw through. Now suck in the air through the straw. The bottle crumples. Why? The air outside is pushing against it, and there isn’t enough air inside the bottle to push it back with equal force.


When there is air
outside 
and
 inside the bottle, the bottle stays in shape. 


Take a straw.
Cover one end of it with your finger and suck in air from the other side. What
do you observe?


Can
you figure out why the straw crumples?




