


















Little Vishnu was a dreamer. He loved
to read. He also loved to travel. 
But he hated waiting at airports and train
stations, taxi stands and bus terminals. 
Travel always seemed to take so much
time!























‘How I
wish I had a magic carpet,’ he thought. ‘I would whizz from place to place in
no time like Aladdin.’




 How did human beings first go from one place to another? They walked. 
Once they learnt to tame animals, they rode donkeys, horses, camels, and elephants. Hundreds of years passed. The wheel was invented, and bullock carts and other carriages took people everywhere. 



















A few centuries ago, the steam engine
was perfected and trains were built. Next came the motor car, and people got to
places faster. 
Cars ran on internal combustion engines. The
Wright brothers took this engine and worked on it so that it could power a
plane. Engineers took this a step further. They designed rockets to fly humans
to outer space and to the moon.


 ‘But why are we still slower than a magic carpet?’ Vishnu wondered. 
 
 
 
He asked his mother. He asked his father. 
 He even asked his teacher. Nobody could give him a satisfactory answer.
 
 
 
His father said, “We are faster than we ever were. We can go from Chennai to Bengaluru in five or six hours by rail or road. And it takes less than 40 minutes by air. Why, you can even fly from Delhi to Washington in just 16 hours! The Japanese bullet trains take people from one island to another in just a few hours. How much faster do you want to go, Vishnu?” 
                              
                    How far in 40 minutes?


                                        
                                            
                  4 km


                                          
                                      40 km


                                                
                                                        60 km


                                                                                                         600 km






















‘They
don’t understand,’ thought Vishnu. Every time he travelled, he wished he had
magical powers that would take him anywhere in an instant. He grumbled about it
to Rahul, his best friend.


 One day, Vishnu saw a newspaper headline that sent his little world into a spin. It said: ‘Hyperloop: the modern day magic carpet’.
 
He ran to his friend’s house. “Rahul, the Hyperloop is coming! It is going to be faster than any train or plane,” he said. 
“What is that?” asked Rahul’s sister Anuradha, joining them. 



















“Hyperloop is a super, super, SUPER
fast mode of transport. I just read about it in the newspaper. It’s a system
with small vehicles called pods that will carry people through long, massive
vacuum tubes. These tubes will rest on columns or be constructed underground.”





          



			
 The more Vishnu told Rahul and Anuradha about the hyperloop, the more excited he became.
 
“We would be able to go from Chennai to Bengaluru at the speed of a
 plane — in less than 40 minutes! Isn’t it great? It takes five to six hours 
 when we go by bus or train.” 

		


      
Anuradha was full of questions.
“How will it move? Is it safe?”
 
“The pods will go whoosh! 
Through the tubes... 
levitating all the while. 
Safety tests for the hyperloop 
are being carried out right now,” Vishnu said.
 
 “They will be faster than bullet trains!” said Rahul.
 
“Really?” asked Anuradha.
 
“The idea is to work towards the speed of sound, about 1,235 kilometres per hour,” said Vishnu.
 
“But how?” asked a puzzled Rahul. 
 “With hardly any air resistance or friction to slow them down in vacuum, the pods can whizz through the tubes. Imagine zipping from Chennai to Bengaluru in a matter of minutes! 
How awesome is that?”
 
They laughed, thrilled with the idea. 
“But tomorrow I have to take a bus to Bengaluru!”
groaned Vishnu. That night Vishnu dreamt of 
travelling in the hyperloop...
Hyperloop, the dream transport
 
The hyperloop is a futuristic transport system. It is expected to be environment-friendly since the tubes can have solar panels on the roof, allowing for a clean and self-powering system.
 

			
 India is already working on a hyperloop project
. It will run from Mumbai to Pune.

		



















But the world has seen great inventions
because of people’s dreams and imagination. 
Vishnu dreams a lot. 

What do you dream about?


